# Conclusions {-}



## Chapter \@ref(MIKK-genomes-chap) {-}

In this first substantive chapter of the thesis, I explored several genomic traits in the MIKK panel that are relevant to its utility for the genetic mapping of complex traits, and analysed the structural variants in a subset of its genomes that could be discovered through the use of Oxford Nanopore Technologies' (**ONT**) long-read sequencing platform. I confirming that medaka have a remarkable resilience to inbreeding from the wild, and that despite the spread of a bacterial infection during the inbreeding process that destroyed a number of lines, 30% of them nevertheless survived by generation F~15~ -- a vastly higher proportion than was observed for the mouse and *Drosophila* inbred panels.

I confirmed that the inbreeding process resulted in inbred lines that were highly homozygous across almost the entire genome, comparable to the levels of homozygosity that were present in established inbred strains that have been inbreed for over 100  generations, and that regions of residual heterozygosity are possibly related to regions that have high levels of repeat content and structural variation. I explored the evolutionary relationship between southern Japanese, northern Japanese, and east Korean medaka populations, providing evidence that despite having speciated earlier, the southern Japanese and east Korean populations have interbred more recently with each other than the southern and northern Japanese populations, despite the former pair being presently separated by the Korean Strait. With particular relevance to genetic mapping, I showed that the MIKK panel has a rate of LD decay that would permit a mapping resolution up to 10 times higher than in humans, which in turn would make it more likely to identify the variants responsible for differences in complex traits. 

Finally, I demonstrated the power of ONT long-read sequencing technologies to uncover large-scale structural variation that would otherwise have been hidden from NGS short-read sequencing. In addition, I showed that the traditional reference-anchored approach of genomic alignment can miss large-scale insertions that can otherwise be detected by the emerging graph-based approach. In the future, the ONT sequencing that was performed here on a subset of the MIKK panel will be expanded across the entire panel, which will permit the inclusion of both large- and small-scale variants in F~2~-cross GWAS studies.

## Chapter \@ref(Pilot-chap) {-}

In Chapter 3, I usde a custom behavioural assay to characterise and classify bold-shy behaviours in 5 previously-established inbred medaka strains. I described the assay, assessed its robustness against confounding factors, and applied a hidden markov model (HMM) to classify the fishes' behaviours across a spectrum of boldness-shyness based on the individuals' distance and angle of travel between pre-defined time intervals. I described how the strains differ in their behaviours over the course of the assay (a "direct genetic effect"), and how the behaviour of a single "reference" strain (*iCab*) differs in the presence of different strains (an "indirect genetic effect").

## Chapter \@ref(Somite-chap) {-}

In Chapter 4, I describe the bioinformatic processes and genetic association models that I used to map the variants associated with variation in the period of somite development, based on an F~2~-cross between the southern Japanese *iCab* strain, and the northern Japanese *Kaga* strain. Although the variants we identified do appear to have been functionally validated, the analysis discloses the many difficulties in reliably identifying the genetic variants that drive differences in phenotypes of interest.

## Chapter \@ref(MIKK-F2-chap) {-}

These results of this chapter confirmed that the F~2~-cross method applied to the MIKK panel is a promising technique for the discovery of loci associated with complex traits. I applied modern computational methods to first develop a data-driven analysis of fish behaviour, and then select a subset of inbred lines that diverged in both their own behaviour, and the extent to which they transmitted their behaviours to their social partners. I then performed an F~2~-cross with those lines to map the genetic variants associated with those differences. Although this analysis was clearly under-powered, I nevertheless discovered a number of statistically significant loci in orthologue genes that have been found to be related to neurological phenotypes in mice, rats, and humans. As noted above, my collaborators are in the process of generating another F~2~ generation for these crosses to increase the power of the analysis. Future work can functionally validate these loci with targeted CRISPR-Cas9 knockouts, expanding on our knowledge about the genetic and environmental contributions to trait variation through an improved ability to control both genes and social environment with inbred lines that are representative of the kinds of variation that is naturally occurring in the wild.

## Chapter \@ref(Fst-chap) {-} 

Finally, in Chapter 6, I turned to humans to compare and rank all complex traits in the GWAS Catalog based on the extent to which their associated alleles vary across global populations, using the Fixation Index ($F_{ST}$) as a metric, and the 1000 Genomes dataset as a sample of global genetic variation. I set out the bioinformatic pipelines used to process the data, presented the distributions of $F_{ST}$ for trait-associated alleles across the genome, and used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to compare the distributions of $F_{ST}$ across different traits. I found that for most complex traits, the $F_{ST}$ distributions of their associated variants look remarkably similar to those of a random set of allele-frequency-matched SNP. Any further extrapolations from this finding are, however, limited by the low correlation between $F_{ST}$ and differences between groups in their actual mean values for those traits. This analysis is nevertheless a worthwhile illustration of the distributions of $F_{ST}$ for trait-associated variants across diverse human populations.
